[Amit Varma]: One of the greatest signs of privilege in the modern world is how many things we take
[Amit Varma]: for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Looking at myself, for example, I take it for granted that I have a roof above my head
[Amit Varma]: and will have one for the foreseeable future.
[Amit Varma]: I can eat when I am hungry.
[Amit Varma]: I will always have access to drinking water.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a friend of mine recently pointed out that thanks to technology, the next generation
[Amit Varma]: will never know what it is to be lost.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine that, GPS Zindabad.
[Amit Varma]: Well, today's episode is about water, which is something that people like me are lucky
[Amit Varma]: enough to take for granted, while millions in this country are not.
[Amit Varma]: Now, usually things get better.
[Amit Varma]: But in this regard, matters might actually get worse.
[Amit Varma]: We think of water as an endless resource.
[Amit Varma]: But could India actually be running out of water?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In one sense, India has had a water crisis for decades.
[Amit Varma]: Millions of Indians don't have access to clean drinking water.
[Amit Varma]: But those who run the country take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: I always assumed, though, that the issue here was distribution.
[Amit Varma]: I thought, well, we have the ocean on three sides, we are a land of rivers.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a question of using technology to make all this water drinkable and then distributing
[Amit Varma]: it efficiently.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered while recording this episode, that my notions about water were completely
[Amit Varma]: wrong, and that we might be headed for a water crisis.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for this episode is Vishwanath S. He is well known on Twitter as Zen Rain Man,
[Amit Varma]: and has been an activist for water conservation for over three decades.
[Amit Varma]: I'd heard a lot about him.
[Amit Varma]: And as I didn't know anything about the subject, I invited him over for an episode.
[Amit Varma]: We recorded this in Bangalore a couple of weeks ago.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, Vishwanath, thanks so much for coming on the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Vishwanath, you worked in the field of water conservation and in the field of water generally
[Amit Varma]: for more than three decades now, 32 years, 32 years.
[Amit Varma]: And these days, there's been a lot of news about Bangalore's water wars, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Can you contextualize our current problems for me a little bit?
[Guest]: That's interesting.
[Guest]: India is a bit peculiar as compared to other countries when it comes to how it accesses
[Guest]: water.
[Guest]: One striking example for me, which has driven me to work in this particular sector also
[Guest]: has been the dependence on groundwater.
[Guest]: We have close to 33 million wells and borewells.
[Guest]: We take out 250 cubic kilometers of water, that's groundwater every year.
[Guest]: So this is far more than what the next two nations, China and the USA combined to.
[Guest]: Together China and USA take about 220 cubic kilometers out, India takes 250 cubic kilometers
[Guest]: of groundwater out.
[Guest]: So this dependence on groundwater is something stunning.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a complete layman.
[Amit Varma]: So excuse me for this very sort of newbie question, but how do the other nations then
[Amit Varma]: get their water?
[Amit Varma]: Like if we are different from depending so much on groundwater?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I think the other nations, China and the USA are to a large extent dependent on surface
[Guest]: waters.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Waters from rivers which they stock up in reservoirs, dams and then pump it across or
[Guest]: canalize it across the country.
[Amit Varma]: But in our case, we are dependent more on drilling underground and…
[Guest]: We have been to for a long, long time, we have depended on groundwater.
[Guest]: It dates back to the Indus Valley Civilization, Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa, Lothal, we have a history
[Guest]: of open wells, which provided water and this is striking again, because it's called the
[Guest]: Indus Valley Civilization, yet the habitations actually took their water from groundwater.
[Amit Varma]: So why was that?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you'd imagine a land with so many rivers would, you know, not have this kind
[Guest]: of…
[Guest]: Well, it looks like a historical coincidence, but let's look at it from also the other
[Guest]: lens of what I would call water romance, which I'm pretty much romantic about.
[Guest]: This discovery that a hole in the ground could yield water was something stunning for civilization.
[Guest]: Some tectonic shift happened.
[Guest]: You were no longer tied to the tyranny of rivers and lakes.
[Guest]: You could go to the countryside, dig a hole in the ground, find water and survive.
[Guest]: And it looks like the ancients in India cracked that particular form of knowledge.
[Guest]: So therefore, you were anywhere and everywhere and remember this country of ours, what is
[Guest]: now what we call India is two-thirds semi-arid, it's in the Deccan Plateau.
[Guest]: So the rivers are ephemeral, they're not permanent, they're not perennial rivers.
[Guest]: And then when you have to survive for the whole year, you look for solutions and the
[Guest]: well was a striking solution.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the implications of our dependence on groundwater?
[Guest]: Here's the thing.
[Guest]: Till we were dependent on open wells, there was a strange sort of communication between
[Guest]: the ecological resource that is water and us as human beings.
[Guest]: So the wells spoke to us, it would tell you summer is coming.
[Guest]: So you started to alter your behavior depending on the water availability.
[Guest]: The well was both functional and communicative, it rewarded you for good behavior.
[Guest]: If you recharged around the surrounding areas, if you protected the forest, then the well
[Guest]: had plenty of water.
[Guest]: If you dumped waste material, well, the well would get polluted and you wouldn't be able
[Guest]: to use the water.
[Guest]: So these signals of communication and functionality was something striking about the well.
[Guest]: Come the 60s, and then we slipped into the era of the borewell.
[Guest]: The borewell stopped communicating to us, they only communicate to us twice, once when
[Guest]: they strike water and once when they're dead, actually.
[Amit Varma]: Because we no longer see what's happening to water levels, how they're changing with
[Amit Varma]: the seasons, and we can't adjust accordingly.
[Guest]: So that information is stopped.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So the borewell does not let you know how much water there is, what is the source of
[Guest]: that groundwater?
[Guest]: Where is it coming from?
[Guest]: What is the quality of that groundwater?
[Guest]: What can you do to protect it?
[Guest]: How much of it are you using up?
[Guest]: All these signals are completely lost with the borewell.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of the seen and unseen effects of borewell drilling, like, what were the
[Amit Varma]: advantages which led to that being adopted as a technology in the first place and what
[Guest]: eventually happened?
[Guest]: So there's a strange coincidence to the entry of the hard rock drilling rig into India documented
[Guest]: by UNICEF, amongst others.
[Guest]: In the 60s, the mid 60s, there was a continuous drought for three years, and there was actually
[Guest]: famine, there was food shortage and great water shortage.
[Guest]: And UNICEF brought in these drilling rigs from the UK, Denmark and the USA, hard rock
[Guest]: drilling rigs, about 18 of them, and started drilling for water.
[Guest]: These went off into the villages of Bihar, UP, Madhya Pradesh, and they brought life
[Guest]: saving water.
[Guest]: So they were a big boon at that particular point of time because the wells had dried
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: The borewells had to be dug to about 100-200 feet, which the wells would not have reached.
[Guest]: And then the hand pump was attached to it, and life saving water came.
[Guest]: But in a peculiar Indian tradition, we took the drilling rig, jugadofied it and started
[Guest]: to make the rig itself.
[Guest]: So, small town of Tiruchangod in Tamil Nadu is now one of the leading exporters of borewell
[Guest]: drilling rigs in the world.
[Guest]: These rigs then started to get used for irrigation and agriculture, farmers started to drill
[Guest]: it, they were uncontrolled, nobody controlled the number of wells that were being dug.
[Guest]: And actually, the political establishment started to give free electricity for the pump
[Guest]: sets to mine water from these, and so they spread rapidly, became politically uncontrollable
[Guest]: and started to exploit a lot of water.
[Guest]: Two consequences, the benefits, of course, of the Green Revolution came from groundwater,
[Guest]: a lot of people argue not from the dams of India.
[Guest]: The second consequence on health, for a long for a short time, diseases like the guinea
[Guest]: worm were eliminated, waterborne diseases became less because groundwater was pure water.
[Guest]: But slowly, poisons such as fluoride and arsenic started to emerge.
[Guest]: Now we have a situation, because of our dependency on these deep borewells, that about 66 million
[Guest]: Indians are consuming fluoride contaminated water and about 18 million Indians are consuming
[Guest]: arsenic contaminated water.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's quite a revelation.
[Amit Varma]: So the first seen effect of borewells was effectively that it played a part in enabling
[Amit Varma]: the Green Revolution, which of course saved millions from possible starvation and was
[Amit Varma]: a big boon to us.
[Amit Varma]: And the second effect was that diseases like guinea worm, for example, completely vanished.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, before I ask you to elaborate on the unseen effects, you spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: the spread of borewells was, you hinted that it was perhaps more than it should have been.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, partly because of government incentives, like free power, which allowed
[Amit Varma]: people to pump up as much water as they wanted.
[Amit Varma]: And we started, we jugarified and we started making them ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And can you elaborate on that a bit, like how, like, was the was the spreading of borewells
[Amit Varma]: at what point does it sort of become a con rather than a pro?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: That's an interesting question.
[Guest]: I think in the initial days when the Geological Society of India, which was one of the strong
[Guest]: proponents of the hard rock drilling rig and the borewell, went about its business, farmers
[Guest]: did not believe that a four inch hole in the ground could actually yield water.
[Guest]: So they had to be persuaded by scientists who actually dug these borewells and drew
[Guest]: the clean water out.
[Guest]: And I think even in the minds of the geologists, it was not clear that we were going to run
[Guest]: out of groundwater, because we had not formed a good idea of how much water was actually
[Guest]: there, what was the volume that was being recharged annually, and what were the areas
[Guest]: from which these deep borewells were being recharged.
[Guest]: I think that hydrogeological science is only now developing in India, we are doing something
[Guest]: called sub aquifer mapping, trying to understand these hard rock aquifers in a more thorough
[Guest]: manner, which we did not know in the 60s and 70s.
[Guest]: So we went about assuming infinite resource.
[Guest]: And I think that was the handicap.
[Guest]: So one does not lay blame on a deliberate attempt to create a scarcity.
[Guest]: But this is the very nature of technology and science.
[Guest]: It seems that we create problems, and then overcome them with solutions, which are actually
[Guest]: greater problems.
[Amit Varma]: And so then the cycle continues, except that, you know, with most everyday technology, like
[Amit Varma]: if there's a bug on the latest Android version, it's fixed really fast, and the information
[Amit Varma]: is flowing really fast.
[Amit Varma]: And here, because it's geology, and you don't really know what's under the earth, and it's
[Guest]: something that can take decades to play out and affect millions of people.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And how many hydrogeologists are produced in India?
[Guest]: It's a good question to ask.
[Guest]: And where do they go?
[Guest]: Most of them went to the oil industry.
[Guest]: So we had a lack of human resource power, we still have a lack of human resource power,
[Guest]: given the complexity of the science, who has to do the investments in managing groundwater?
[Guest]: Is groundwater a government resource?
[Guest]: Is it a common pool resource?
[Guest]: Is it a private resource?
[Guest]: It's now managed as a private resource.
[Guest]: When do we flip from being from turning it into a common pool resource from a private
[Guest]: resource?
[Guest]: And then who does those investments are big question marks even now.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the unseen effects that you pointed out, of course, with the new diseases that
[Amit Varma]: came about like chloride poisoning, and so on and so forth, but, you know, going even
[Amit Varma]: beyond that, as our knowledge grew of, you know, how scarce groundwater might be how
[Amit Varma]: it gets depleted, where it comes from, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Looking at those learnings, what can you say are the and also the point you made about
[Amit Varma]: the information that a person living on the land has about the water content of the land
[Amit Varma]: disappearing because you this was now unseen the water at the borewell was striking as
[Amit Varma]: opposed to the scene water in a well, which you're in touch with every day.
[Amit Varma]: How did all of this play out?
[Amit Varma]: What are the long term unintended consequences?
[Guest]: So one unintended consequence is the drying up of the peninsular rivers, a lot of people
[Guest]: don't get the fact that it's not merely depletion of catchments and cutting down of forests
[Guest]: and trees, but it's actually the sinking of the groundwater table through millions of
[Guest]: borewells, which causes our rivers to dry up.
[Guest]: And so if we want to revive our rivers, which is now quite a thing with society, then we
[Guest]: have to get our groundwater tables high.
[Guest]: It's a relationship not understood pretty well.
[Guest]: The second point is what it did was it caused farmers to take loans to drill borewells.
[Guest]: Enough evidence has come that farmers would take loan after loan, sink borewell after
[Guest]: borewell in this desperate chase for water because that was his only source of water
[Amit Varma]: for whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So he would have to drink multiple borewells because he drink dig one and then that would
[Amit Varma]: get over and he'd have to dig another one.
[Guest]: The thing with hard rock terrain is that if you drill a borewell, it's not a guarantee
[Guest]: that you will strike water, you may drill one four meters away and it may strike water
[Guest]: because this waters occur in cracks and crevices which are limited, there's not a sponge like
[Guest]: aquifer which the well would have tapped into.
[Guest]: So this uncertainty of being able to strike water was a clear factor in hard rock borewells
[Amit Varma]: and this caused tremendous agricultural distress.
[Amit Varma]: So what followed from this, take me on a narrative like through the decades, like in the 60s
[Amit Varma]: you have problems of food and water and then you have these borewells coming in, they enable
[Amit Varma]: the green revolution and it seems like a technological miracle and by and large the green revolution
[Amit Varma]: was something which helped millions of people enormously.
[Amit Varma]: But then through the decades, a story then starts playing out where people gain more
[Amit Varma]: and more knowledge about what it's actually doing to the groundwater and we start facing
[Amit Varma]: the consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Can you sort of tell me that story through the decades?
[Guest]: Well, yeah.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So let's see, India is getting independent in 47, our population is about 330 million.
[Guest]: We are a nation growing just about enough food for ourselves.
[Guest]: Slowly the population starts to increase, in the 50s we are faced with a set of droughts
[Guest]: and in the 60s it becomes striking because we get three year drought, continuous drought
[Guest]: and then we have a hand-to-mouth living as is described with grains coming from the USA,
[Guest]: PL 480.
[Guest]: At the time there's a war with Pakistan 65 coincidentally or otherwise and now our dependence
[Guest]: on food becomes a security risk for us.
[Guest]: So we start to think what we should do.
[Guest]: Caesar Bramaniam steps out, Prasad Swaminathan and meet Norman Borlaug and the high yielding
[Guest]: dwarf variety, the Mexican dwarf variety of wheat comes to India.
[Guest]: This dwarf variety needs actually more water and it needs lots of groundwater for its productivity
[Guest]: to increase.
[Guest]: It needs fertilizers, it needs pesticides.
[Guest]: Then comes the rice, the International Rice Research Institute is established in Odisha
[Guest]: to begin with, later on shifted to the Philippines, they developed IR 64, a wonderful hybrid variety
[Guest]: which comes to the Tanjavur belt which is in the Cauvery area.
[Guest]: These wheat and rice strains are now demanding water, they are producing food security and
[Guest]: informally, subversively farmers are drilling bore wells to feed this water but we are fixated
[Guest]: on the food output.
[Guest]: We are not looking at what's happening to the water depletion and slowly the spread
[Guest]: of this both these varieties is all across India.
[Guest]: In the meantime, the hard rock drilling rigs have come technologically speaking.
[Guest]: They have started to replace the traditional diesel pump or the animal driven lifting devices.
[Guest]: They now start to dig deeper and deeper and start to move everywhere.
[Guest]: Free power is started to be given to the farmers because the farmer lobby is a strong lobby,
[Guest]: agriculture is a strong lobby and so therefore, this depletes groundwater even further because
[Guest]: it is indiscriminate use of the groundwater, flood irrigation, it is not drip or sprinkler
[Guest]: irrigation.
[Guest]: And slowly eventually, we are into 33 million bore wells and 250 cubic kilometers of water
[Guest]: over time.
[Guest]: Now, we realize the gravity of the situation, we start to figure out areas where groundwater
[Guest]: is depleting and we try to bring control through law, it does not work, none of the places
[Guest]: in India, groundwater rules and legislations are working because the number, sheer number
[Guest]: of bore wells to manage and regulate has become too huge.
[Guest]: Now, we are in an era where we want to recharge the aquifers and try to make it up but we
[Guest]: still have not found an idea for demand management.
[Guest]: Until we find a balance between demand management and what goes in into the groundwater as rainwater,
[Guest]: strike a balance, we will be in for tough times.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems like an almost insurmountable problem because at the policy level, the government
[Amit Varma]: will of course say that we need to not destroy the depleted resource, we need to figure out
[Amit Varma]: a way to make it better.
[Amit Varma]: But at the individual level, the incentive for the individual farmer always will be to
[Amit Varma]: make sure that his next crop has the water it needs and therefore, he doesn't give a
[Amit Varma]: damn and farmers are an important constituency and politicians therefore have to kind of
[Guest]: listen to them, can't go against them.
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: But however, there are grains of experiments which are now happening where we are turning
[Guest]: the resource into a common pool resource and there's a particular program called the participatory
[Guest]: groundwater management, which the group which I'm working with, Argyam, it's a funding agency,
[Guest]: it's also funding and we're trying to bring together pools of farmers who pool their
[Guest]: groundwater bore wells.
[Guest]: So, let's imagine about 40 or 50 farmers come together, link up their bore wells, use drip
[Guest]: irrigation and sprinkler irrigation so that they are effective, put up a rain gauge in
[Guest]: the place and understand how much it rained.
[Guest]: Based on the rainfall, take a call on how much water is recharged these bore wells and
[Guest]: therefore, use and grow crops which require less water than what it rained.
[Guest]: So, if this year it rained less, you grow millets, if it rained more, you grow paddy.
[Guest]: That kind of a call.
[Guest]: You link up the groundwater and build that groundwater knowledge, link the bore wells.
[Guest]: The pooling also brings in market feasibilities.
[Guest]: You can buy seeds cheaper, you can sell to the market as a cooperative, as a unit, as
[Guest]: a producer unit.
[Guest]: These experiments seem to show a glimmer of hope for the common pool resource that groundwater
[Guest]: has become.
[Amit Varma]: Are they just sporadic efforts made by organizations like yours?
[Amit Varma]: Because it imagined that it's actually in the farmers' long term interest to pool together
[Amit Varma]: and do this for various reasons, not just the water, but also the collective power they
[Amit Varma]: get when it comes to the marketplace and therefore, this is something that should be happening
[Amit Varma]: anyway regardless of any impetus coming.
[Amit Varma]: Is that the case or have you found that that impetus is required?
[Guest]: So here's the thing.
[Guest]: The institutional architecture of groundwater governance in India is varied from state to
[Guest]: state because groundwater and water is a state subject.
[Guest]: One of the better performing institutions is the Groundwater Survey and Development
[Guest]: Agency, which is in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And Maharashtra has taken up very formally this way of pooling groundwater and trying
[Guest]: to work on it as a modality.
[Guest]: And we're eagerly waiting for the kind of results that will come there because that
[Guest]: will set an exemplar for other states to follow.
[Guest]: There's no other choice.
[Guest]: We have to make it work.
[Guest]: But we have to get these institutions to be full of specialties which can deal with societies,
[Guest]: not just groundwater alone.
[Guest]: So far, we have thrown hydrogeologists, now we need community mobilizers.
[Guest]: We need people who can organize farmers groups.
[Guest]: This is a different skill set altogether.
[Guest]: So the governance architecture of groundwater will have to be reimagined and it will have
[Amit Varma]: to change.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of, to understand the situation we're in and the crisis that there is, give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense of the worst case scenario.
[Amit Varma]: Supposing Vishwanath, you don't exist and this governance architecture doesn't take
[Amit Varma]: place and there's no one really doing anything about this and it's just individuals going
[Amit Varma]: by without that larger knowledge that you have gained.
[Amit Varma]: What's the worst case scenario?
[Guest]: What can happen?
[Guest]: It's playing itself out in many parts of the country, playing itself out in North Gujarat.
[Guest]: It played itself out in Chennai, that groundwater ran out completely, that societies had to
[Guest]: migrate out.
[Guest]: There was great agricultural distress, economic distress.
[Guest]: People struggled for drinking water, drinking water had to be shipped in trains and trucks
[Guest]: and tankers.
[Guest]: In Gujarat?
[Guest]: In Gujarat, in Maharashtra, in Karnataka, in many places, in many habitations, the groundwater
[Guest]: has simply run out.
[Guest]: There is no life without groundwater.
[Guest]: So, you'll see great patches of India, which will simply be not occupied because there's
[Guest]: no groundwater.
[Guest]: And, mind you, when groundwater tables fall, forests will start to die, because the roots
[Guest]: of the trees cannot get into the aquifers to drink water.
[Guest]: So, you can imagine terrific catastrophes, the limited forest cover that we have which
[Guest]: feed our rivers will die and so therefore our rivers will be in distress, they're already
[Amit Varma]: in distress.
[Amit Varma]: This is both an ecological disaster as well as a humanitarian disaster, because you'll
[Amit Varma]: have people migrating away from areas where there's no groundwater and quite apart from
[Amit Varma]: the devastation that's already been wreaked on them by having to migrate, they'll put
[Amit Varma]: pressure on the areas they migrate to, who will in turn, in a cascading effect, face
[Amit Varma]: these problems of their own.
[Amit Varma]: Is there any, like you said, a lot of nations don't quite depend on groundwater.
[Amit Varma]: Are there other options?
[Amit Varma]: Like, if we take it as a given that eventually, over time, the groundwater is not going to
[Amit Varma]: sustain us.
[Amit Varma]: Are there other options in terms of, you know, again, I'm asking completely as a layman,
[Guest]: that can fill that need?
[Guest]: Well, different areas and different rainfall patterns and different hydrogeologies will
[Guest]: have to show a different response.
[Guest]: Kerala in India has the largest density of open wells for any place in the world.
[Guest]: What Kerala is now doing with its rainfall is it's picking up rooftop rainwater, many
[Guest]: households in Kerala and feeding their wells, so that the wells are full all the time that
[Guest]: the quality of well water improves, and it can quickly become a mass movement.
[Amit Varma]: And this is again an innovation that's happened, as you pointed out, because they get information
[Amit Varma]: about what's happening to the level of water in the well, and therefore, they can prepare
[Amit Varma]: in advance and they understand what's happening while with borewell drilling and so on, you
[Amit Varma]: have no information, you assume it's there till it's not there.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, this business of modernity, which started to bring piped water to homes with all good
[Guest]: intentions to remove the duress that women had to go to bring the water and make things
[Guest]: easier.
[Guest]: Pipe water inside the house caused this disconnect, because you don't know where the pipe water
[Guest]: is coming from, how much there is water in the rivers and all.
[Guest]: So, some examples are striking, what we are trying to do is to merge both the pipe network
[Guest]: as well as groundwater.
[Guest]: Belgaum is a striking example.
[Guest]: When they ran out of water for the pipe network, an engineer there called RS Nayak thought
[Guest]: about the old open wells there and with the help of the community mobilized and cleaned
[Guest]: up those old open wells.
[Guest]: The community promised not to chuck Ganesh idols into it, garbage into it.
[Guest]: In return, with some small funding, they were able to put up water networks for the local
[Guest]: community 500 people, 1000 people, sometimes even 10,000 peoples, a local network linked
[Guest]: to the local well, pipe water to your homes.
[Guest]: So, here's an incentive for the community to keep their wells clean, to recharge water
[Guest]: and then in turn they get water.
[Guest]: As opposed to the pipe water supply, which cost them about 12 rupees a kiloliter, the
[Guest]: water from the well was only 75 paisa a kiloliter and I'm talking 75 paisa for 1000 liter.
[Guest]: So, there's an economic benefit and an ecological benefit and an environmental benefit plus
[Guest]: sustainability.
[Guest]: And this water supply scheme is giving water to 200,000 people in Belgaum of a population
[Guest]: of 500,000 people.
[Guest]: Kundapur, which is close by, started to get 24 bar 7 pipe water supply.
[Guest]: Well, when the residents were asked to connect and pay a connection fee, they said, we already
[Guest]: have our 24 bar 7 supply from our wells, they're giving us 24 bar 7 and we're in charge of
[Guest]: these wells.
[Guest]: So, why do we need your pipe water connection?
[Guest]: So, somewhere these two will have to meet the pipe water network aspirations of the
[Guest]: people and the well as a sustainable water resource and the community understanding what
[Guest]: the well is.
[Guest]: And so, that challenge will have to be played itself out differently in states like Kerala,
[Guest]: in small towns and cities and in the vast rural areas of India.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it seems it seems a really great challenge because like in a village, okay, you can have
[Amit Varma]: communities and they have wells and so on, but in a large city like Mumbai or Bangalore,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you don't have those open wells and that sort of connect, you're dependent
[Amit Varma]: on the pipe water supply and then on the water supply basically.
[Guest]: So, let me give you one more example from Bangalore because you raised this important
[Guest]: point of urbanization and the complexity of cities and how you manage it.
[Guest]: And this example is Rainbow Drive on Sarjapur Road, just opposite Wipro, 36 acres of campus,
[Guest]: 360 plots, not connected to the city utility network.
[Guest]: What would they have done?
[Guest]: Each one of them would have drilled a bore well as they build their homes.
[Guest]: So, you would have 360 straws emptying out the cup of water, each competing with the
[Guest]: other, pretty soon it would be finished.
[Guest]: When we worked with the community and the community had some reasonably enlightened
[Guest]: leadership, what they did was they banned private bore wells, they said we'll sink
[Guest]: three community bore wells and we'll share the groundwater, but 360 will now compulsorily
[Guest]: recharge the aquifers.
[Guest]: So, each one of them will make a recharge well, which is about three feet in diameter
[Guest]: and about 20 feet to 30 feet deep, pick up all the rooftop water, the water which flows
[Guest]: on the roads and make sure that it's filtered and send it into the aquifer.
[Amit Varma]: So, recharge well is something that collects all this water and…
[Guest]: Unlike a well which gives you water, a recharge well picks up rainwater, clean rainwater and
[Guest]: puts it into the aquifer.
[Guest]: So, you got 360 recharge wells, but only three wells which were drying.
[Guest]: Still this was not enough.
[Guest]: When we did a water balance for them, we figured that they were consuming 265 liters per person
[Guest]: per day.
[Guest]: With all the rainwater harvesting they do, they're still overdrawing on the aquifer.
[Guest]: So, they had to get it down to 130.
[Guest]: They put a meter in every connection, they price the water.
[Guest]: So, if it's more than 20,000 liters per month consumption for a household, they pay
[Guest]: 120 rupees a kiloliter.
[Guest]: The consumption came down to something like 120 liters per capita per day.
[Guest]: With the monies that the institution collected, they were able to invest in a wastewater treatment
[Guest]: plant.
[Guest]: They pick up treated wastewater and send it to the households for non-potable use.
[Guest]: So, again, the net freshwater demand has dropped to something like 80 liters per capita per
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: They are now contributing to the city of Bangalore, they're contributing water.
[Guest]: They're self-sufficient, they're sustainable, and they have perhaps the cheapest water in
[Guest]: town.
[Guest]: So, these kind of examples, this is 36 acres, it's now being replicated in a 70 acre layout.
[Guest]: It's gone to a 200 acre layout where they've discovered that the basements were flooding
[Guest]: and the wells had water and they were buying water at the same time.
[Guest]: So, this sort of mental map in which we've forgotten what shallow aquifers and wells
[Guest]: are, are being regenerated.
[Amit Varma]: So, this is obviously a remarkable and inspiring story.
[Amit Varma]: But as you pointed out, it's a community which is relatively small, and also had enlightened
[Amit Varma]: leaders, and therefore is sort of one island of enlightenment in overall.
[Amit Varma]: So, my question to you there is that, let's say that as a society, it's a problem we need
[Amit Varma]: to solve.
[Amit Varma]: What is, what is the role that the government can play in it with all the incentives because
[Amit Varma]: they are usually focused on the short term, and they have different kinds of special interest
[Amit Varma]: groups?
[Amit Varma]: And what is the role that we cannot look to government to play, that we have to say that
[Amit Varma]: society has to make these moves and these ideas, and these values have to spread through
[Amit Varma]: society?
[Amit Varma]: How hard is that?
[Guest]: Can it happen?
[Guest]: What are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So, that's a, that's an important point.
[Guest]: I think the institutional architecture for water governance in India is 20th century.
[Guest]: We're faced with 21st century problems.
[Guest]: And unless we redefine our institutions and get them to be able, capacitated enough to
[Guest]: be able to address our problems, we're going to be stuck with some challenges.
[Guest]: From a policy perspective, the city of Bangalore, Chennai, for example, drives a rainwater harvesting
[Guest]: policy, which makes it mandatory for every household to do rainwater harvesting.
[Guest]: It's not being implemented at the efficiency and effectiveness, which it should be.
[Guest]: But a beginning has been made.
[Guest]: And why it's not being implemented is something that we need to crack because we do not have
[Guest]: a good communication outreach to persuade citizens to understand the benefits of doing
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But if we do that, then we have a substantial amount of recharge of our aquifers.
[Guest]: So therefore, our bore wells and groundwater open wells can come back to life.
[Guest]: If lakes are rejuvenated, and if they're fed with treated wastewater, so in the rainy season,
[Guest]: you feed the lakes with rainwater, in the non-rainy season, you feed them with treated
[Guest]: wastewater which comes in through constructed wetlands.
[Guest]: And there's an example in Jakkur, there's an example in a lake called Rajanalli, Puttanalli,
[Guest]: many examples are there.
[Guest]: Then these lakes recharge that shallow aquifer and a huge amount of groundwater becomes available
[Guest]: for the city to reuse, right.
[Guest]: So a wastewater policy which talks about ecological use of treated wastewater to recharge aquifers.
[Guest]: A groundwater policy which says, okay, in a particular area, you're not allowed to sink
[Guest]: individual bore wells, but community bore wells will supply you water.
[Guest]: A rainwater harvesting policy, wastewater policy, groundwater policy, all talking to
[Guest]: each other and reinforcing sustainability is the way for government to think and work
[Guest]: upon.
[Guest]: At a policy level, that's already happening, we need more better implementation.
[Amit Varma]: What do you see are the bottlenecks here?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is it the government sort of seeing the light?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it a matter of state capacity?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it a matter of communication?
[Guest]: It's again that cities need what is called integrated urban water management institutions,
[Guest]: an institution which looks at water holistically.
[Guest]: A classic example is Jakkur Lake.
[Guest]: Now, if you go to the lake, the lake is with the BDA, the Bangalore Development Authority,
[Guest]: which is handed over to the Bangalore Mahanagar Palike.
[Guest]: The fishes in the lake belong to the fisheries department.
[Guest]: The recharge that the lake water does is monitored by the Mines and Geology Department in the
[Amit Varma]: Central Groundwater Board.
[Guest]: So these are like separate silos, which...
[Guest]: Completely.
[Guest]: The wastewater which comes in is managed by the Bangalore Water Supply and Storage Board.
[Guest]: The rainwater which comes in is with the Mahanagar Palike.
[Guest]: You take any one of this institution to the lake, and they're like the six blind men of
[Guest]: Hindustan.
[Guest]: They just see their point of view, and then they come back.
[Guest]: Now, unless we get these institutions to sit together on one plan of action and management,
[Guest]: we have a challenge.
[Guest]: Now, residents associations are doing the convergence.
[Guest]: They sit, they identify a problem.
[Guest]: Okay, solid waste is coming in.
[Guest]: I go to the BBMP and fix it.
[Guest]: Medical waste is coming in.
[Guest]: I go to the State Pollution Control Board and make sure that they take action.
[Guest]: But that citizen action cannot be long term and sustainable.
[Guest]: Our institutions have to, like I said, reimagine themselves and come together on this common
[Guest]: platform.
[Guest]: It's possible.
[Guest]: It's a long road.
[Guest]: It's a harder route.
[Guest]: It's not a technical solution.
[Guest]: It's an institutional and governance solutions.
[Guest]: We need that kind of capacities to come together to reformulate our institutions and governance
[Guest]: policies to make it happen.
[Amit Varma]: So when you spoke about sort of the institutional architecture being of the 20th century instead
[Amit Varma]: of the 21st century, what you're referring to is that the same thing that they all work
[Amit Varma]: in kind of silos.
[Amit Varma]: And now we need to recognize the problem and bring it under one authority, which can then,
[Guest]: you know, take these decisions and get it done.
[Guest]: That's one part of the problem.
[Guest]: The 20th century architecture of institutions was one of supply management, the resource
[Guest]: was available in plenty, you needed engineering skill sets to pump water from a large distance.
[Guest]: The Bangalore Water Supply Storage Board, set up in 1964, was the first water utility
[Guest]: set up in India.
[Guest]: And its biggest achievement was that it brought water from the Cauvery River in 1972, which
[Guest]: is 100 kilometers away and 300 meters below the city.
[Guest]: Huge engineering challenge.
[Guest]: Now the resource itself is running out.
[Guest]: But what this institution is geared for is to pump water to the city.
[Guest]: So its next imagination is to bring water from the Sharavati River, which is 340 kilometers
[Guest]: from Bangalore.
[Guest]: Whereas what it perhaps needs to do is to look at the ecological resource available
[Guest]: within the city like rainwater, wastewater, groundwater, and manage it.
[Guest]: But there is not a single hydrogeologist in the institution.
[Guest]: There's not a single hydrologist.
[Guest]: There's not a single ecologist.
[Guest]: How can that hockey team play football, which is what is being asked of them?
[Amit Varma]: That's a brilliant articulation.
[Amit Varma]: And like you just pointed out, citizen activism has its limits, and you also don't have enlightened
[Amit Varma]: citizens everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So what really you need here is, in a sense, political will and governmental will, which
[Amit Varma]: are slightly separate things, but those are what you need.
[Guest]: What are the obstacles to those?
[Guest]: Well, actually, the government too is listening.
[Guest]: It's not that all politicians are bad.
[Amit Varma]: There are quite a few ministers who...
[Amit Varma]: But the incentives are sort of different.
[Amit Varma]: They're geared towards a short term, winning the next elections, more towards handouts
[Amit Varma]: and deep fundamental change.
[Guest]: That is true.
[Guest]: The democratic cycle and the ecological cycle of sustainabilities, this one is a five year
[Guest]: cycle.
[Guest]: But in the minimum 20 year cycle, they don't overlap and the short termism and suboptimal
[Guest]: nature of democracies start to impact it.
[Guest]: However, I think we can find a midway by which we commit ourselves to a long term plan, which
[Guest]: is cutting across political frontiers, but then use the democratic cycle for equity and
[Guest]: distribution, which is as critical as resource management.
[Guest]: The big challenge for our cities is not how much water is coming in as much as who is
[Guest]: getting this water.
[Guest]: Here the political system can play a major role in making sure that there is equity.
[Guest]: So I see a lot of merit, but what we need from civic society groups and activist groups
[Guest]: is to be able to understand the weaknesses of the system and address those in a solution
[Guest]: mode rather than to keep on harping on problems and highlighting problems.
[Guest]: You can keep on saying that Belandur Lake is getting sewage, that it's foaming and frothing.
[Guest]: But what is the architecture by which you want to manage it is something that civic
[Guest]: and academic institutions, civil society groups have to come together and brainstorm a bit
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: And what I've often heard from civil society activists in other fields is that when it
[Amit Varma]: comes to dealing with government, you can sort of push for short term measures and jugars
[Amit Varma]: and little fixes here and there, but changing fundamental architecture is much more difficult
[Amit Varma]: because of sort of the incentives involved.
[Amit Varma]: So I sort of now want to talk about your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: You've been in this for 32 years, you've been a sort of an evangelist for reform in all
[Amit Varma]: of these.
[Amit Varma]: What has that journey been like?
[Amit Varma]: Like to what, what's your struggle been to convince fellow citizens around you of what
[Amit Varma]: the problems are?
[Amit Varma]: And from there, what's your struggle been to actually make fundamental change happen?
[Guest]: Well, it's not been struggle, struggle, as in where you see it as a sort of a despondent
[Guest]: act.
[Guest]: I've had great joy and happiness in being able to understand the complexity of the problem
[Guest]: and trying to see how individually and as teams, different kinds of teams, we're able
[Guest]: to push the solution envelope a bit more.
[Guest]: Luckily, 14 years of my initial life in the job sector, I spent with Housing and Urban
[Guest]: Development Corporation, which is the Government of India undertaking.
[Guest]: So I know how the government thinks I was lucky enough to do that.
[Guest]: And that job gave me exposure to many geographies of South India, especially I must have visited
[Guest]: every alternate village and almost every town and city as part of that job.
[Guest]: So it was a huge learning experience and one learned the strengths of government and the
[Guest]: limitations of government.
[Guest]: Then once you stepped out, the challenge was, how do you work with communities, academic
[Guest]: institutions, and even the government from a policy influence part of you.
[Guest]: So it's important to build a brand around yourself and a thought process that you do.
[Guest]: So that has been very important.
[Guest]: I think you must be seen as somebody who does not have an agenda, which is political or
[Guest]: whatever, personality driven, but which seeks to bring positive change to communities, individuals.
[Guest]: The response has been fabulous.
[Guest]: I mean, I have the choice are from working with well diggers, traditional well diggers.
[Guest]: There are a community who have been digging wells in India for 1200 years now, and who
[Guest]: have run out of a livelihood because nobody's digging wells, but everybody's digging bore
[Guest]: wells.
[Guest]: So how do you make sure that they get a job?
[Guest]: So in the policy, we said in the rainwater harvesting policy, which I was fortunate enough
[Guest]: to write with the government was to say, hey, everybody will make a recharge well.
[Guest]: So suddenly the livelihood opportunities for these well diggers came up and the well diggers
[Guest]: learned a new skill and a new trade.
[Guest]: You pick up rainwater and you send it into wells, they didn't know a damn about it.
[Guest]: Now many of these wells have water.
[Guest]: So there's at least 10,000 open wells in Bangalore with water in it.
[Guest]: So people call them again to clean it up every year, which was what they used to do before
[Guest]: and deepen it a bit more and make sure that the water quality is improved.
[Guest]: So you see that solving a water problem is also engaging with history, livelihoods, its
[Guest]: economic benefits, its social benefits, and all these add up to ecological benefits.
[Guest]: And when you see that canvas, it motivates you almost on a daily basis, because there's
[Amit Varma]: something exciting happening.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel you're taking small steps all the time and then it's then it's sort
[Amit Varma]: of getting to somewhere really meaningful or do you sometimes feel there's an impasse
[Guest]: and I mean, oh, there's old monk for that.
[Guest]: But the thing is that the beauty of at least the work that I got on myself was that I was
[Guest]: able to engage with one small rainwater harvesting unit, which collects 2000 liters of rainwater
[Guest]: to be able to sit on writing the wastewater policy for Karnataka, rainwater harvesting
[Guest]: policy for Karnataka, sitting with the planning commission as one of the subgroup members
[Guest]: to be able to address some of those issues.
[Guest]: So scale, ways of thinking institutional governance to actually doing that sort of engagement,
[Guest]: which really gives you a huge kick.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And supposing some of my listeners are listening to this and thinking that, hey, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as a concerned citizen, I'd like to do something about this.
[Amit Varma]: Now, two questions for you on that account.
[Amit Varma]: One, can you explain the scale of the problem?
[Amit Varma]: What are things like right now?
[Amit Varma]: And two, what is it that concerned citizens can do at a practical level immediately?
[Guest]: So the scale of the problem is an agglomeration of a million problems.
[Guest]: If you take a city like Bangalore and there are 1.8 million households, the city of Bangalore's
[Guest]: problems of water is 1.8 million problems, which then agglomerate.
[Guest]: So therefore, you can become part of that 1.8 million solutions because you occupy one
[Guest]: of those households and one of those homes.
[Guest]: The thing to do is to start to understand what water is in your household level itself.
[Guest]: And it's not rocket science if you want to, you can cut down consumption 30%, 40% if intent
[Guest]: is there.
[Guest]: You need space between the years, you don't need space anywhere else.
[Guest]: Second is to look at the rainfall in your apartment, in your building and see what's
[Guest]: happening to it and whether it can be put to better use.
[Guest]: And one of the better uses is to make sure that it goes and infiltrates into the ground.
[Guest]: These are immediate actions.
[Guest]: The second set of actions is to reach out at a community or a watershed level.
[Guest]: There is a lake within two kilometers of every apartment or house in Bangalore, step in into
[Guest]: the lake on a Sunday, which we try and get what we call friends of lakes to come.
[Guest]: Pick up 10 plastic bags from that lake.
[Guest]: The next time somebody chucks a plastic bag in that lake and you realize you're going
[Guest]: to pick it up, it really makes you mad.
[Guest]: So your ownership of the lake is generated by simple small actions and then work with
[Guest]: groups to figure out what needs to be done to save the lake.
[Guest]: It's not going to be easy, but you'll understand the political ramifications, the challenges
[Guest]: which a city has to go through in managing water.
[Guest]: And it gives you pretty much a can-do kind of a positive moment.
[Guest]: And I think we need to work at a lot of these can-dos at various scales, you know, you engage
[Guest]: with your corporator, engage with your MLA, engage with your water utility provider and
[Guest]: see how the challenges they think that exist and what can be done by you as a participant.
[Amit Varma]: You'll find many solutions.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to end with, I mean, this has been extremely illuminating, and I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to end with two questions.
[Amit Varma]: One, what makes you despair about the journey that you're on and what can happen to what
[Guest]: India's water problems and to what makes you hopeful?
[Guest]: The despair comes from a sort of a binary view that we seem to think that economic development
[Guest]: means certain sacrifices and therefore ecological environment has to degrade.
[Guest]: This set of thinking articulated in that river water reaching a sea is a waste.
[Guest]: It makes you despair saying how much more literate should we become ecologically and
[Guest]: environmentally.
[Guest]: And your point is they can go hand in hand, there's no trade-off.
[Guest]: They absolutely go hand in hand, there is no binary there, they have to coexist together
[Guest]: and we have to find, you cannot label people environmentalists or you cannot label people
[Guest]: pro-market and leave it at that.
[Guest]: Both have to talk to each other and reinforce each other and understand each other's problem.
[Guest]: But that conversation is not deep enough or not smooth enough in the sense we don't seem
[Guest]: to be able to sit and dialogue a way out.
[Guest]: That's a cause for despair.
[Guest]: The cause for hope is to see the millions of actions, fishermen, well diggers, poor
[Guest]: well diggers, everybody who's in some way or the other contributing to make sure that
[Guest]: what we have as a society and as a nation stays somewhere reasonably good.
[Amit Varma]: So that engagement fascinates me.
[Amit Varma]: That's an inspiring note to end on and you know, if you're listening to the show, you
[Amit Varma]: don't just have to listen to our journey and say, hey, that's nice, but you can also be
[Amit Varma]: part of it.
[Amit Varma]: Vishwanath, thanks so much for coming on the show, it's my honor.
[Guest]: It's my pleasure and the Twitter handle is at Zen Rain Man, I have to do this.
[Amit Varma]: I always tweet that at the end of the show, don't worry, but at Zen Rain Man and he tweets
[Amit Varma]: regularly about all of these issues.
[Amit Varma]: So please go and check that out.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I really hope you write a book about this someday, because all of this has
[Amit Varma]: been such a learning for me just, you know, talking to you today.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there's such a great narrative of how our woes with water have sort of developed.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Thanks for that suggestion.
[Guest]: I'm basically too lazy a person to be able to sit together and print words.
[Guest]: The communication has to be immediate and absolutely these kind of conversations that
[Guest]: I have with you, it's such a pleasure to talk because then thoughts flow and we can answer
[Amit Varma]: questions.
[Amit Varma]: It's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd love to have you on the show again sometime.
[Guest]: Thanks so much, Vishwanath.
[Unknown]: Pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do follow Vishwanath on Twitter at Zen Rain
[Amit Varma]: Man.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Past episodes of the seen and the unseen are available at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, two final pieces of advice before I go.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, please stay hydrated.
[Amit Varma]: But number two, don't waste water.
[Amit Varma]: While you figure it out, goodbye till next week.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the seen and the unseen, check out another show by IVM Podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Sriket.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: As you can see, we have a podcast listener in his natural habitat.
[Unknown]: Millions of years of evolution have led him to this point.
[Unknown]: He's on his way to work and listening to podcasts makes his miserable day better.
[Unknown]: He will now head to work and use all his knowledge to communicate with other colleagues and possibly
[Unknown]: future mates.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out all the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening.